Jean Huston has lived a mythic life, which is,
not surprisingly, the title of one of the 26 books she's
authored on the subject of human development and mythology.
Her early years put her in close contact
with Margaret Meade, Helen Keller, Einstein, and others,
all of whom served to push her out into the world
as a leading thinker of our times.
In this candid interview, she shares her
most profound moments of awakening
and her depths of humiliation that came
from a working relationship with Hilary Clinton.
But mostly she shares how the world
is now waking up in unison.
You grew up large, in a large environment,
with large personalities, your father in show biz,
and there has to have been some sort of catalytic event
that launched you onto this path
from what could have been a life in show biz.
Yes, it could have been and it was not.
I think it happened when I was about eight years old
and my father said "Hey, kiddo, you want
to come and talk to Charlie?"
Charlie was Charlie McCarthy.
My father was writing these big radio and television shows.
Edgar Burkin and Charlie McCarthy.
Edgar Burkin was a well-known ventriloquist
and Charlie was his dummy, a wise-cracking dummy,
and I loved to go talk to Charlie
because we would trade quips back and forth.
And I said "Yeah, daddy, let's go."
So we went to his hotel room -
my father had a script to deliver -
and we opened the door, and Burkin
was sitting sort of slanted towards us,
didn't see us, he was talking to his dummy.
There's nothing unusual about that.
We thought he was rehearsing.
But as we listened, my father said
"I didn't write that stuff," because
Edgar Burkin was asking his dummy ultimate questions.
"Charlie, what is it truly love?"
"Charlie, where is the soul?"
"Charlie, tell me about the nature of mind.
Where does it come from?"
And this dummy was answering,
his little wooden jaws clacking away,
"Why, Burkin ..." with tremendous answers,
answers that seemed to have been crafted
by the greatest minds of history.
Burkin would get more excited:
"Yes, Charlie, but what is the relationship
of the self to the universe?"
"Well, Burkin ..." you know, these things.
And my father, who was an agnostic Baptist,
couldn't stand it, and finally he just coughed,
and Burkin turned around; he said
"Oh, hello, Jack. How ya, Jeanie? You caught us,"
and my father said "Yeah, and what
in the world are you doing?"
And he said "Well, I'm talking to Charlie.
He's the wisest person I know."
My father said "But, Ed, that's you. That's your voice.
That's your knowledge coming out of
that cockamamie dummy's mouth."
And Burkin said "Yes, I suppose ultimately it is,
but, you know, when I ask him these questions and he answers
I haven't got the faintest idea what he's going to say,
and what he says astounds me with his answers.
It is so much more than anything I know."
And I could literally feel ...
I remember the hair rose my head,
and I felt like my future was there.
I knew something then in my own eight year old way.
I knew that as we are compared to the way we think we are,
we live in a very tiny, small house
within the multiple mansions of our being,
and that part of my life had to be to
explore the other floors, the other houses
in this great mansion.
What an astounding story ...
But then two weeks later,
two weeks later I was at my favorite school -
I went to 20 schools before I was 12
because we were always on the road with dad -
and it was a school at which the teachers
had been trained by John Dewey and his associates,
so we learned math through dancing and rhythm,
and we were taken to meet the great elders of the time.
I was even trotted across the river,
and we met Albert Einstein, who I remember
as being very vague with a great deal of hair,
and he had a red sock on and a blue sock.
But on this occasion our teacher said
"Children, today we're going to meet Helen Keller."
And she read to us from that extraordinary piece
of Ms. Keller's writing where she says
"for the first six years of my life, I had no concepts,
I couldn't understand anything,"
because she was deaf, dumb and blind.
Right.
And my teacher, Annie Sullivan,
took me to the "I define what needs to be done and do it,"
whether it's in the family, community,
the country, the world.
And she said "Jean, it's always better to help."
I'll tell you what I did do, though.
Because of that, I went through a series
of very interesting coincidences and synchronicities.
I was able to then go and work with people with Alzheimer's.
Interesting.
Yes.
My uncle had - my uncle by marriage - had severe Alzheimer's
and he used to just be in his nursing home singing.
And I noticed that the other people around,
the other people around him, started to listen,
and I figured something's going on here.
So I began, after my career was sort of ...
I wonder if there was a sort of freeing
element to this on some level, embedded in the ...
So what I did was I began to
take the hands of somebody born, you know,
1912, 1913 - this is 12 years ago -
and I would sing to them a song from their early childhood.
"Hush, boy. Don't you cry. Go to sleep little baby."
And then I might go a few years ahead, 1913, 15.
"Every little movement has a meaning all its own.
Every little gesture ..." dah-dah-dah-dah.
1917. "I wish I could shimmy like my sister can."
1921. "Charleston, Charleston."
Anyway, all the way up, and often,
not all the time, but often, I would sing
and their eyes would light up and sometimes
they would start to sing with me
around the 1930s, early 40s.
"The bells are ringing for me and my gal."
"I wish I had a paper town I could call my own"
if they were born, you know, somewhere between 1910 and 1918
or somewhere around that.
And on occasion I would ask a question singing.
"Where have you been and what are you doing?"
And some of them would sing back
and tell me such stories about
these marvelous adventures they were in,
these extraordinary landscapes,
and occasionally, very rarely,
one would be able to make a switch
and be able to talk about here and now
where he or she felt very foggy
and it was very vague and confused
and then in this other realm
where they were doing very well, thank you very much,
as if they were in a quantum mind.
Now, you can say I've taught a lot of nurses
how to do this, doctors not so much
because, you know, they say "nonsense."
A few doctors but a lot of nurses.
Subsequently there's been people writing papers about this,
because it just went out in suggesting
what we tend to do is we pathologize people.
We do not mythologize.
It is also what's going on
because the earth does not work that way
where everything just decays and goes to hell.
Something else was going on, especially with human beings.
It was as if another order of whether you call it
mind at large, a frequency was being touched,
and these people were now no longer constrained
by about what you should see or do,
because that part of the brain just wasn't working.
Right.
So that's what I did. That's funny.
I went from the White House to the nursing homes and worked.
And ...
And learned a whole lot of things from them.
Would you say your identification
with the archetypal energy of Athena
really pulled you through and allowed you to ...
I think there certainly was a level of that.
Yes.
You know, I cannot pretend ...
You must have felt like a bruised version
of that for a little while ...
Very bruised. Very bruised.
But you have pulled yourself back from that.
Well, that was a long time ago. It was 12 years ago.
Yeah.
And back working with the UN and working with ...
Living large again ...
Well, I've been living large for some time ...
Yes.
But I mean, for about 3 or 4 years,
it really was devastating.
You know, the press has license to kill.
Yes, they do. They're killing our minds on many levels.
Well, they don't tell the full story, you know,
and they're not terribly interested in it.
I mean, there were people who were.
Larry King, for example, is quite wonderful
about going into the deeper story,
but you'd be surprised by the people who didn't.
But, anyway, it's just what happens,
that if you're going to live ...
Mrs. Roosevelt said to me, when I was 15 years old,
16 years old, I guess,
She said - and she had this interesting voice -
"My dear girl, you must realize,
that you can expect, I suspect,
to have a very interesting professional life.
But remember, my dear, that as a woman in our time,
you can expect to be hurt.
But remember, a woman is just like a teabag,
you put her in hot water and she just gets stronger."
You know, you have to expect that in our time,
that women will get hurt, as we all do.
But women particularly, because we're reversing
the tread of thousands of years, you know.
It is a shock to the cultural psyche, what is happening,
but it may also be one of the single most important things.
And what, in all of this, is
the field of potential right now
for expansion into the new ...
Well, we are world designers.
We're in the time of second genesis in terms of
ourselves and the world, the very fact of it.
As I said, we are rising to a new understanding
of human capacities, we have the diversity,
the harvest of the world's potential.
It's extraordinary, the fact that
all of our social systems are breaking down.
We need to let go of the collective ego.
Yeah, getting ego, realizing
that we are not encapsulated bags of skin,
dragging around dreary little egos,
we are organism environments symbiotic with the earth.
Whole new kinds of social systems are emerging
that have to do with action between peoples
and nations and cultures.
The "zeit" is getting "geisty."
There's a spiritual revolution happening in our time.
The membrane between the self and other is breaking down.
If we don't live in a state of radical empathy,
we don't live at all.
I mean, the earth herself is calling to us,
probably the cosmos, as well.
These are the times and we are the people.
Other times in history thought they were it;
They were wrong; This is it; This is it.
Jean, thank you so much.
Thank you.
I wish you the very best with
your program of social artistry,
and I have a few people in mind
that might want to jump on and really get involved.
Again, I know you're a busy woman,
and I look forward to meeting you again for many years.
Thank you so much.
I hope you enjoyed this conversation with Jean.
Please go to Amazon.com or another major book seller
to purchase copies of one of her many books.
Until next time, thanks for watching CMN.